docs: Add design of Noise Analysis (#1902)
google/heir: docs/content/en/docs/Design/noise.md

---
title: Noise Analysis
weight: 9
---

Homomorphic Encryption (HE) based on Learning-With-Errors (LWE) and Ring-LWE
naturally need to deal with *noises*. HE compiler, in particular, needs to
understand the noise behavior to ensure correctness and security while pursuing

> efficiency and optimizaiton.
> 
> The noise analysis in HEIR has the following central task: Given an HE circuit,
> analyse the noise growth for each operation.
> 
> HEIR then uses noise analysis for parameter generation. Parameter generation
> worths another documentation so the details are not discussed here.
> 
> Noise analysis and parameter generation are still under active researching and
> HEIR does not have one-for-all solutions for now. All the noise analyses and
> (especially) parameter generation in HEIR could be viewed as experimental.
> *There is no warranty that they are correct or secure* and HEIR does not take
> the responsibility. Please consult experts before putting them into production.
> 
> ## Two Flavors of Noise Analysis
> 
> Each HE ciphertext contains *noise*. A noise analysis determines a *bound* on
> the noise and tracks its evolution after each HE operation. The noise should not
> exceed certain bounds imposed by HE schemes.
> 
> There are two flavors of noise analyses: worst-case and average-case. Worst-case
> noise analyses always track the bound, while some average-case noise analyses
> use intermediate quantity like the variance to track their evolution, and derive
> a bound when needed.
> 
> Currently, worst-case methods are often too conservative, while average-case
> methods often give underestimation.
> 
> ## Noise Analysis Framework
> 
> HEIR implements noise analysis based on the `DataFlowFramework` in MLIR.
> 
> In `DataFlowFramework`, the main function of an `Analysis` is `visitOperation`,
> where it determines the `AnalysisState` for each `Value` mainly based on the
> visiting `Operation`.
> 
> As there are various HE schemes in HEIR, the detail *transfer function* of these
> `AnalysisState` is defined by `NoiseModel`, which parameterizes the
> `NoiseAnalysis`.
> 
> The `AnalysisState`, depending on whether we are using worst-case noise model or
> average-case, could be interpreted as the bound or the variance.
> 
> A typical way to use noise analysis:
> 
> ```cpp
> DataFlowSolver solver;
> // load other dependent analyses
> 
> // schemeParam and model determined by other methods
> solver.load<NoiseAnalysis<NoiseModel>>(schemeParam, model);
> 
> // run the analysis on the op
> solver.initializeAndRun(op)
> ```
> 
> ## Implemented Noise Models
> 
> See the [Passes](/docs/passes) page for details. Example passes include
> `generate-param-bgv` and `validate-noise`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
title: Noise Analysis
weight: 9
---

Homomorphic Encryption (HE) schemes based on Learning-With-Errors (LWE) and Ring-LWE
naturally need to deal with *noises*. HE compilers, in particular, need to
understand the noise behavior to ensure correctness and security while pursuing
efficiency and optimization.

The noise analysis in HEIR has the following central task: Given an HE circuit,
analyse the noise growth for each operation. HEIR then uses noise analysis 
for parameter selection, but the details of that are beyond the scope of this
document.

Noise analysis and parameter generation are still under active research and
HEIR does not have a one-size-fits-all solution for now. Noise analysis and
(especially) parameter selection in HEIR should be viewed as experimental.
*There is no guarantee that they are correct or secure* and the HEIR authors
do not take responsibility. Please consult experts before putting them into
production.

## Two Flavors of Noise Analysis

Each HE ciphertext contains *noise*. A noise analysis determines a *bound* on
the noise and tracks its evolution after each HE operation. The noise should not
exceed certain bounds imposed by HE schemes.

There are two flavors of noise analyses: worst-case and average-case. Worst-case
noise analyses always track the bound, while some average-case noise analyses
use intermediate quantities like the variance to track their evolution, and derive
a bound when needed.

Currently, worst-case methods are often too conservative, while average-case
methods often give underestimation.

## Noise Analysis Framework

HEIR implements noise analysis based on the `DataFlowFramework` in MLIR.

In the `DataFlowFramework`, the main function of an `Analysis` is `visitOperation`,
where it determines the `AnalysisState` for each SSA value. Usually it computes
a transfer function deriving the `AnalysisState` for each operation result based
on the states of the operation's operands.

As there are various HE schemes in HEIR, the detailed transfer function is defined
by a `NoiseModel` class, which parameterizes the `NoiseAnalysis`.

The `AnalysisState`, depending on whether we are using worst-case noise model or
average-case, could be interpreted as the bound or the variance.

A typical way to use noise analysis:

```cpp
DataFlowSolver solver;
solver.load<dataflow::DeadCodeAnalysis>();
solver.load<dataflow::SparseConstantPropagation>();
// load other dependent analyses

// schemeParam and model determined by other methods
solver.load<NoiseAnalysis<NoiseModel>>(schemeParam, model);

// run the analysis on the op
solver.initializeAndRun(op)
```

## Implemented Noise Models

See the [Passes](/docs/passes) page for details. Example passes include
`generate-param-bgv` and `validate-noise`.
```

Reviewer: Just some slight changes to the prose above.
